Silly Sayings
#############

:Date: 2015-04-21
:Category: Life
:tags: Stories

OK, I admit it, I am something of a sarcastic kind of person. I like to use
over-the-top humor sometimes to break down barriers. Sometimes the sarcasm is
not well received, it all depends on the situation. I am sorry, but being
serious all the time can keep folks from making progress. I am not really
criticizing them when I say some of these, I am trying to get them unstuck!

My Favorites
************

Here are some of the lines I have been known to use, in no particular order.

    * Don't just do something, sit there!

This line is usually thrown at someone who is just sitting there, deep in
thought, perhaps. I have been known to throw it out in hopes of getting that
someone to open up about what has them stuck at the moment. Perhaps together,
we can get them moving forward again.

    * If at first you don't succeed, forget it, it is not worth the effort!

I am not a fan of this saying, but it seems to be the way many people operate.
Things just do not always come easily in this world, you have to work at it.
But far too often I see evidence that "instant gratification" is what many
think the world should offer. Not succeeding the first time you try something
should not defeat you, it should motivate you to defeat that something. Don't
be a quitter, be a winner!

    * When in doubt, RTFM!

If you do not know what `RTFM` means, it means "read the f****** manual" (you
fill in your favorite "f" word). 

Many folks treat reading the manual as an admission of defeat. Guess what!
Someone wrote that manual to help you get over what they thought would be the
things that stump you when you are learning this new thing. My only problem
with manuals is that they are often written by developers, who "know
everything", and have a tough time speaking to someone who "knows nothing" (at
least as far as this new thing they are trying to comprehend goes!) 

In today's world, when someone gets stuck, I think a better saying is this:

    * You got questions? Google has answers!

Once you learn how to use a good `search engine`, you can often solve
problems faster by using them. Looking things up in that book by your side can
take far more time. Of course, you need to be "connected" to do this, but who
is not, these days? (I do remember my first cruise, from Galveston to Key West.
We had been out of sight of land for two whole days, and cell phones were out of
range as well! As we got close to shore, I saw dozens of folks gathering at the
bow of the ship, all holding their cell phones up to the sky. I suspect they
were praying to the cell phone gods to give them a signal. It was hilarious!)

Unfortunately, by relying on these search tools, there are some studies that
suggest that people are not energizing their brains enough to think through
problems any more. We are back to that "instant gratification" thing again! The
studies are telling us that failure to exercise our brains will lead to problems
as we get older. Sorry folks, the problems happen far sooner than that!

The only problem I really have with using search engines all the time is
trusting those answers. The Internet is littered with facts, which seems to be
a synonym for opinions these days. You absolutely must consider the source when
you get answers from anything like Google. 

    * If you do not crash every once in a while, you are not going fast enough!

I love this one. It obviously comes from the racing world. Trust me, I have
crashed a few times in my life. Some of those crashes came while racing
motorcycles, none while flying. Thank God for that! 

My crashes have always taught me a thing of two. I learn best by pushing myself
(see `Pushing The Edge <http://www.co-pylit.org/blog/pushing-the-edge.html>`_).
You get to a point where you think you know something, then you push yourself
to learn a little more about it. That act of pushing, teaches you more and
more. You may discover that you are learning about things you never expected to
learn. I am constantly exploring new technologies, many of which I never knew
existed until I pushed on something I was trying to learn, and discovered new
things about that technology! Pretty Cool!

I once had the privilege of watching a master of pushing the edge. Ever heard
the name Mario Andretti? He was my favorite race car driver when I was young,
and fascinated by fast cars. My good friend, James Coffin, had introduced me to
the world of sports car racing, something I could not afford, and I was
hooked!. While stationed in Dayton Ohio, I heard that Mario was going to race
at the Mid-Ohio Raceway. I drove there just to see him race. I got to witness his
first race in an “open wheel” race car. It was amazing.

The car he was driving could go close to 200 miles per hour, and Mid-Ohio had a
two mile long straight stretch, followed by a 180 degree hairpin curve. Drivers
had to brake hard to slow down enough to make that turn. I walked along that
straight section until I was at the place where most drivers came off of the
throttle and went for their brakes to make that turn. You could hear the
change. Full power make a neat sound, then the sound disappeared as they hit
the brakes. It was fun to watch that. We graded each driver by exactly where
they came off of the throttle!

Then came Mario!

He knew how to push the edge. Shoot, he was the master of that edge. He knew
exactly what he could do, and what his car could do. The first time he came
down that straight, he sailed past where we were standing, and we watched in
awe as he finally hit the brakes and made it through the hairpin turn. He was
so much better at this than any other driver in that race, it was just amazing.

Mario went on to become the World Champion in Formula One, probably the most
important racing circuit in the world. (Austin built the first real Formula One
Track in the United States, and every year we see the world’s best drivers here
in town!)

    * The best way to get something done fast is to slow down!

Now this is just silly. I just talked about pushing yourself to go fast, now I
am advocating slowing down. As I think about that, it makes sense. There is
actually one speed you can go that is just right. (Goldilocks comes to mind
about now!)

My students live complex lives. I guess we all do. It is a life full of things
that need to get done, like my lab assignments. The problem is one of balance.
You have to decide what gets done first, and often my assignments get put off.
Then comes a deadline, and you need to get things done in a hurry.

So, the student sits down and engages in something called "blasting code". That
means they engage in a marathon typing session trying to pour out a solution to
a programming problem in one furious session. 

It just does not work! 

They then spend a huge amount of time trying to find out why that huge mess
they just created does not work. The solution it to do something called "baby
steps". Instead of trying so hard, you need to back off and take small steps
toward a solution. This takes practice, but it works! You take a small step,
review what you just did by testing your work. Every step should move closer to
a solution, and you should have some idea what your small step is about to
accomplish. If that step does not work, you know exactly what you just did and
can undo it if necessary, Or fix it if you can. Once you are satisfied with
what you just accomplished, you move on to another baby step. It seems
counterintuitive, but it works. You end up spending less time overall getting
your assignment done, and the process if much more enjoyable because you spend
less time fighting through a mess that is broken and you have no idea where the
problem lies.

In racing, crashing does not win races, so once you have properly defined that
"edge", you learn to recognize the edge and go exactly that speed. And you win
races. Well, you win as long as your tools are as good as they can be as well!

That leads to another statement!

    * Cheap tools lead to cheap work!

I never had much money when growing up. So buying tools was hard. I never could
afford the tools I wanted, so I bought the cheapest tools I could afford. In
the end, that was a mistake. Back to my racing days, I could just barely afford
my motorcycles, and I learned to fix them myself. The tool kit that came with
the bike was cheap stuff the manufacturer stuffed in a case just to say they
gave you something. They were junk! In the end, I bought better tools, but
still could not afford really good tools. I fumbled my way through, but never
was able to do the work I wanted.

As an example, I raced Kawasaki motorcycles. They were good machines, but not
the best. I used to practice going fast over rough ground at a local motocross
track where local racers practiced. I could never keep up with them, no matter
how hard I tried.

Then a friend, who was a sponsored rider, meaning a motorcycle company thought
enough of his skills to give him a bike to race, let me ride his machine. It
was a CZ Motocross machine with an engine exactly the same size as the one on
my Kawasaki. 

My first lap around that track was so much faster than I ever managed, I almost
scared myself. The defining example was a triple step jump up a hill in the
middle of the course. You hit the first step and jumped up toward the next
step. You did the same thing twice more to get to the top of the hill. At least
that was how I used to ride over that hill. On the CZ, I approached the hill,
cracked the throttle to pick up the front wheel and jump up over that first
step, and was going so fast, I sailed over the next two steps completely and
was at the top of the hill! Man was that motorcycle powerful! It was a much
better "tool" for this particular job that the one I owned.

Well, I could not afford that CZ, but I was impressed with it. I did manage to
overcome my cheap roots and start buying quality tools that worked well, and
lasted a long time. You pay for quality, but quality pays off in the end! Don't
sell yourself short by failing to invest in the tools you need to do your jobs
well!

	* NIH

This one is simple, and it has nothing to do with the National Institute of
Health. It is a disease many people (and organizations) have. It stands for
“not invented here”! What this one means is that we have a hard time trusting
the work of other people, and feel better if we re-create that work ourselves.
In computer programming, it means people “reinvent the wheel” time after time,
even though the wheel is there, ready for you to use, and you do not have to
invent it again! Far too many programmers do not understand this!

IBM once did a study of their own software development efforts and found that
they had written the exact same code so many times it was insane! Part of the
reason for that was just that the programmers did not know the code already
existed, and part was because they did not trust that code, and rewrote it
themselves. 

By setting up a database of code, and training their programmers to get over
this disease, they were able to drastically cut the cost of software
development! 

I write a lot of computer programs “over”, but that has nothing to do with the
NIH disease! Instead, I am working at my profession, teaching! By writing code
that already exists, I am actually studying `OPC` (`Other People’s Code`)
trying to learn how they made this program work. My goal is not really to
“reinvent the wheel”, but to understand that code well enough to teach my
students how to do the same thing! In the process, I keep expanding my
knowledge, and I keep current in the best new technologies in software
development!  I

    * There is no intelligent life below channel 30

Do you watch network TV these days? I do not, at least not on purpose. When I
look at what goes on there, I am amazed at the junk they push out. The only
thing "real" about "reality TV" is "real stupid". Sorry! If you like this stuff, good luck with that. Me? I
simply do not care about all of this. I see no need to sit there watching people I care nothing about
displaying how idiotic they really are. Well, that is just me, your milage may
vary! (Wait, that is another saying)

I do spend a lot of time in front of a TV, but I hardly ever just sit there and
just watch. Instead, I have my laptop fired up and I and working. I am writing
code, exploring technologies, learning stuff. I glance at the TV from time to
time, but it is not sucking the IQ out of my head! The channels I do watch are
those where I find the History Channel, the Science Channel, Discovery Channel,
you know, those well above 30. 

I had to pick 30 as the magic number. Most network stations are below that
number, and in my town, 31 is Home and Garden TV (HGTV) which is on a ton in my
house!  Cheryl loves that channel! They show folks buying homes, renovating
homes, all of which are her passions! (That is why we bought a fixer-upper in
Kansas City, so she could explore renovating an 80 year old home). Most of my
channels are well above that! There is intelligent life up there, move up,
folks!

    * It is easier to ask for forgiveness, than to get permission!

I have worked in many organizations where the bureaucracy of the place just
plain got in the way of progress. This is a situation that must be approached
carefully, and with confidence in what you are about to do. If you are sure of
a course of action that will move a situation forward, and are willing to take
a risk (aka "push the edge") GO FOR IT! Sure you might get yelled at. But, if
your idea has merit, and you succeed, waiting for permission might prevent the
progress you are sure to make. You might find yourself moving forward in your
career, in really cool ways!

I have done this many times in my career, but I always made sure I had my
"ducks in line". I knew what I wanted to accomplish, I had studied the
situation as fully as I could, and I was stuck because my superiors were just
too busy to pay attention to the problem I was facing. So I acted now, and
informed them of the facts later. Some call this "initiative" and you have to
show this to advance in your career. Sure it poses a risk, but if you are not
willing (and able) to push on the "edge" you will not become a better person. 

I am kind of amazed at my success in advising my bosses throughout my career.
Almost without exception, my bosses trusted my advice, especially in things
about computer technologies. All I ever really did was study new computer
technologies , and think hard about where those technologies could help in my
job. If I saw an opportunity to do something new, I went ahead and started
working on that.

In one amazing case, I wrote a simple program demonstrating how to apply a new
technology to analyzing how well the B-2 bomber could do its intended job. I
demonstrated that program to my boss, who then put me in front of a General
Officer and that demonstration code resulted in the creation of an entire
organization tasked with applying that idea to really asses the B-2 before it
went into production! It was a cool moment in my life, and I still remember
sitting in front of my boss running that first demo program! 

    * YMMV (Your Mileage May Vary)

This is an old saying, found on car price stickers as a disclaimer that the
published mileage on that sticker is probably not what you will get in actual
driving. (What? I want real numbers, not fake ones designed to make me buy that
car!)

What this saying is about in my world is simply admitting that we are all
different people, with different goals, likes, dislikes, and skills. Part of
succeeding in this world involves learning how to work together to solve really
big problems. Unless we recognize, and appreciate, our differences, we cannot
hope to work together to move this world forward to a better place. My ideas
are just that. They are MINE. I am not trying to force you to do
things my way! (Unfortunately, that is what I see many politicians trying to
do!) 

What I am trying to do it just get you to hear my story, and explain how things
went for ME. If you find something inspiring in my stories, I have accomplished
my goal. I want you to have as much fun in YOUR life, as I have had in mine. 

When my number finally comes up, I will go on to the next world happy with what
I have done. I hope you can say the same thing when it is your turn!

    * Have a nice day!
	* It is too late for that, I have to go to work!

Well, I hope this is not what you really feel. My goal as a teacher has always been to lead my students toward a life where they have so much fun “working” that they can’t get enough of it. Sounds like I am working on building another generation of workaholics, and in some respects, I am! Finding a balance between work and the rest of your life is always going to be a challenge. But you will spend a considerable amount of your life “on the job”, and you better enjoy what you do. Otherwise, what is the point? I tell folks I never “chased the almighty dollar”. Instead I focus don doing my job well, learning as much about my organization as I could, and finding ways to help that organization move forward. In the end, I earned the respect of my superiors, and whenever I looked behind me, there was enough money to do the things I wanted to do. What more can you ask for? (Oh, and there is not one job I ever had that I would not gladly go back and do again!)

    * Did you find everything?
	* Do you know how long it would take to find everything?

I hear this a lot in stores. And, since I am a literal sort of person, I find it amusing every time I hear it. If they want me to do an inventory for them, they will need to pay me for that!


More to Come
************

I have more sayings (some might say I have too many - HA!) I will wait until I
think up a few stories to go with them before I add to this list. This will get
you started in thinking about your own sayings (and stories), I hope!


..  vim:filetype=rst spell:
